MSC3083: Restricting room membership based on membership in other rooms (#3083)
matrix-org/matrix-doc: proposals/3083-restricted-rooms.md

between `public`, `invite`, and `restricted`.

* `public`: anyone can join, subject to `ban` and `server_acls`, as today.
* `invite`: only people with membership `invite` can join, as today.
* `knock`: the same as `invite`, except anyone can knock, subject to `ban` and
  `server_acls`. See [MSC2403](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2403).
* `private`: This is reserved and not implemented. 
* `restricted`: the same as `public` from the perspective of the auth rules, but
  with the additional caveat that servers are expected to check the `allow` rules
  before generating a `join` event (whether for a local or a remote user).

## Security considerations

The `allow` feature for `join_rules` places increased trust in the servers in the
  room. We consider this acceptable: if you don't want evil servers randomly
  joining spurious users into your rooms, then:

1. Don't let evil servers in your room in the first place
2. Don't use `allow` lists, given the expansion increases the attack surface anyway by letting members in other rooms dictate who's allowed into your room.

The peek server also has significant power. For example, a poorly chosen peek

> server could lie about the space membership and add an `@evil_user:example.org`.

Reviewer: This should be removed as it's no longer relevant?

Author: Thanks! I moved this down into the future considerations bit that I hadn't yet filled out.

## Unstable prefix

The `restricted` join rule will be included in a future room version to ensure
that servers and clients opt-into the new functionality.

During development it is expected that an unstable room version of
`org.matrix.mscXXXX` is used. Since the room version namespaces the behaviour,
the `allow` key and the `restricted` value do not need unstable prefixes.

## History / Rationale

It may seem that just having the `allow` key with `public` join rules is enough,
as suggested in [MSC2962](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2962/),
but there are concerns that having a `public` join rule that is restricted may
cause issues if an implementation does not understand the semantics of the `allow`
keyword. Using an `allow` key with `invite` join rules also does not make sense as
from the perspective of the auth rules, this is akin to `public` (since the checking
of whether a member is in the space is done during the call to `/join`
or `/make_join` / `/send_join`).

The above concerns about an implementation not understanding the semantics of `allow`
could be solved by introducing a new room version, but if this is done it seems clearer

> to just introduce a a new join rule - `restricted` - as described above.

Author: This is essentially the result of this conversation: https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2962/#discussion_r583567946

Author: I've expanded this a bit so I'm unsure if this comment is useful anymore -- I'm going to resolve this, also see the thread below: https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/3083#discussion_r641946633

to a space to gain membership to a room.

### Kicking users out when they leave the allowed space

In the above example, suppose `@bob:server.example` leaves `!users:example.org`:
they should be removed from the room. One option is to leave the departure up
to Bob's server `server.example`, but this places a relatively high level of trust
in that server. Additionally, if `server.example` were offline, other users in
the room would still see Bob in the room (and their servers would attempt to
send message traffic to it).

Another consideration is that users may have joined via a direct invite, not via access through a space.

Fixing this is thorny. Some sort of annotation on the membership events might
help. but it's unclear what the desired semantics are:

* Assuming that users in a given space are *not* kicked when that space is
  removed from `allow`, are those users then given a pass to remain
  in the room indefinitely? What happens if the space is added back to
  `allow` and *then* the user leaves it?
* Suppose a user joins a room via a space (SpaceA). Later, SpaceB is added to
  the `allow` list and SpaceA is removed. What should happen when the

>   user leaves SpaceB? Are they exempt from the kick?

Reviewer 2: I feel like this section is missing some of the good details that used to be part of the original Spaces spec doc, https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/blob/69897584e1365b8d7c3e57190d064edca55cce9f/proposals/1772-groups-as-rooms.md#kicking-users-out-when-they-leave-the-allowed-space

> (XXX: should users in a space be kicked when that space is removed from the allow list? We think not, by analogy with what happens when you switch the join rules from public to invite.)

Relates to my previous comment, "This part feels weird to me. `m.room.join_rules` seems like it should govern joins, not existing room membership." (https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/1772#discussion_r553702595).

Maybe we need a different membership value, `m.room.member` -> `membership: "allowed"` which would inherit the permissions from the `m.room.join_rules`. If the user leaves a space or the `m.room.join_rules` change to not include them, they are kicked.

Author: As part of the "future" extensions bit I'm not sure how fleshed out it needs to be? I'd expect a future MSC to make those arguments.

Author: I included some of the above and re-wrote this section to be a bit less prescriptive.

Reviewer 2: Looks great @clokep 😃 Thanks for including it!

# Restricting room membership based on space membership

A desirable feature is to give room admins the power to restrict membership of
their room based on the membership of one or more spaces from
[MSC1772](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/1772), for example:

> members of the #doglovers space can join this room without an invitation<sup id="a1">[1](#f1)</sup>

## Proposal

> A new `join_rule` (`restricted`) will be used to reflect a cross between `invite`

Reviewer 3: If we just say that an `allow` property allows users from the space to join, then we can apply it to other join rules too.  e.g. if the join rule is `invite` and it has the `allow` property, then it works as described in this MSC.  If the join rule is `knock` and it has the `allow` property, then members of the space can join, and non-members can knock.

Author: There's some conversation about this around https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/3083#discussion_r641946633

and `public` join rules. The content of the join rules would include the rooms
to trust for membership. For example:

```json
{
    "type": "m.room.join_rules",
    "state_key": "",
    "content": {
        "join_rule": "restricted",
        "allow": [
            {
                "space": "!mods:example.org",
                "via": ["example.org"]
            },
            {
                "space": "!users:example.org",
                "via": ["example.org"]
            }
        ]
    }
}
```

This means that a user must be a member of the `!mods:example.org` space or
`!users:example.org` space in order to join without an invite<sup id="a2">[2](#f2)</sup>.
Membership in a single space is enough.

If the `allow` key is an empty list (or not a list at all), then no users are
allowed to join without an invite. Each entry is expected to be an object with the
following keys:

> * `space`: The room ID of the space to check the membership of.

Reviewer 3: What happens in the room in question is not a space?  Could we change it so that it can be any arbitrary room, or does it need to be a space?

Author: The implementation doesn't currently check this, but we should be specific here. Not restricting it to spaces seems more general at a protocol level (without any downsides that I can see). Clients could decide to only show the UI for spaces?

Author: Do you have thoughts on whether we should require it to be a space or would membership in the target room ID be enough?

Reviewer 3: I don't think we lose anything by making it possible to set it to any room, space or not.  It could possibly open up more use cases.  But, as you say, it may make sense for clients to limit what rooms they show when allowing users to select which room(s) to use.

Reviewer 4: I can imagine something simple like "breakout rooms" for a chat. Maybe it is going off topic but some people are interested, so drop the link to the new room and allow anyone from the previous chat to join. This could *probably* be done just by making a "secret" but public room but this is safer. Clients could even add an easy button to do this if they wanted. I agree that clients may want to filter spaces only, or prefer spaces, for the general case.

Author: I can clarify the text around this, do we think the field name should be changed?

Reviewer 3: Yeah, if it's going to be an arbitrary room, then the field name should match that somehow.

Author: I think just changing `space` -> `room` will make the most sense. I'll make this change.

Author: I've made this change.

> * `via`: A list of servers which may be used to peek for membership of the space.

Author: Without depending on MSC2444 (see [below](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/blob/clokep/restricted-rooms/proposals/3083-restricted-rooms.md#checking-space-membership-over-federation)) I wonder if we should just remove the `via`?

> Any entries in the list which do not match the expected format are ignored.

Reviewer 5: maybe we should reject all joins if we don't understand the entries, on the basis that it's presumably a new type of restriction which we don't yet implement?

(Although new restriction types should come with a new room version, so it's pretty moot)

Author: I think this is based on [similar text in MSC1772](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/blob/matthew/msc1772/proposals/1772-groups-as-rooms.md#relationship-between-rooms-and-spaces):

> Children where `via` is not present or invalid (not an array) are ignored.

But requiring the entire event to be valid seems like a reasonable change to me.

Reviewer 5: wait, I think I'm being stupid.

the `allow` list is disjunctive - if *any* of the entries are satisfied, we allow the join; if the list ends up empty, we reject the join.

So, if we ignore entries we do not understand, we are failing in the safe direction - ie, making it *more* secure.

In short, the current text is right imho.

Author: Yeah, it fails to ignoring invalid entries. I'll try to make that a bit clearer in the text.

# Restricting room membership based on space membership

A desirable feature is to give room admins the power to restrict membership of
their room based on the membership of one or more spaces from
[MSC1772](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/1772), for example:

> members of the #doglovers space can join this room without an invitation<sup id="a1">[1](#f1)</sup>

## Proposal

A new `join_rule` (`restricted`) will be used to reflect a cross between `invite`
and `public` join rules. The content of the join rules would include the rooms
to trust for membership. For example:

```json
{
    "type": "m.room.join_rules",
    "state_key": "",
    "content": {
        "join_rule": "restricted",
        "allow": [
            {

>                 "type": "room-membership",

Author: I don't think all values inside of these need to be `m.` namespaced, but I'm unsure. (E.g. the join rules don't follow this, but I suppose the `type` is something that people could reasonably want custom ones of.)

Anyone have thoughts on when these need to be namespaced vs. just values?

>                 "type": "room-membership",

Reviewer 4: My understanding is that they should be so that people can add their own and create temporary names for new MSCs. How will people add custom rules or experiment with new standards if there is no namespace reserved for this?

>                 "type": "room-membership",

Reviewer 6: In general, the word `type` indicates that the value should be namespaced. The MSC doesn't need to define how to work with custom types (see also: encryption), but should theoretically support the ability for experimentation down the line.

We've slowly been using more and more namespaced values as it helps with MSCs down the line. Things like join rules are harder to distinguish testing from reality for instance, so we'd have ideally made them namespaced enums long ago, but didn't and here we are.

>                 "type": "room-membership",

Reviewer 6: also underscores are preferred regardless.

>                 "type": "room-membership",

Reviewer 5: I think a TL;DR of @turt2live's comments is that [MSC2758](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2758)-style identifiers would be preferred here. He's probably right.

>                 "type": "room-membership",

Author: I've updated this to be `m.room_membership`.

return an error  response with HTTP status code of 403 and an `errcode` of `M_FORBIDDEN`.

It is possible for a homeserver receiving a `/make_join` / `/send_join` request
to not know if the user is in a particular room (due to not participating in any
of the necessary rooms). In this case the homeserver should reject the join,
the requesting server may wish to attempt to join via other homeservers.

Unlike the `invite` join rule, confirmation that the `allow` rules were properly
checked cannot be enforced over federation by event authorisation, so servers in
the room are trusted not to allow invalid users to join.<sup id="a3">[3](#f3)</sup>

## Summary of the behaviour of join rules

See the [join rules](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/client_server/r0.6.1#m-room-join-rules)
specification for full details, but the summary below should highlight the differences
between `public`, `invite`, and `restricted`.

* `public`: anyone can join, subject to `ban` and `server_acls`, as today.
* `invite`: only people with membership `invite` can join, as today.
* `knock`: the same as `invite`, except anyone can knock, subject to `ban` and

>   `server_acls`. See [MSC2403](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2403).

Reviewer 7: The way this reads seems to imply `ban` and `server_acls` don't apply to `invite` which I don't think is the intent

Author: Thanks, I'll clarify it! I should probably add a warning saying this isn't meant to be a replacement for reading the spec too.

Author: I've added the additional bits, I think it is all correct now!

* `private`: This is reserved, but unspecified.

> * `restricted`: the same as `public` from the perspective of the [auth rules](https://spec.matrix.org/unstable/rooms/v1/#authorization-rules),

Reviewer 8: This makes me *incredibly* uneasy as it is changing the fundamental nature of the event auth model, which today relies on *only* state from within the room (i.e. the auth chain).

By adding a dependency on shared state from outside of the room, we are creating a number of new problems about how other servers in the room should auth these events:

* Does each server really need to go and query the listed rooms for memberships?
* What happens if they can't — is this suggesting that we should really just accept the join (because it is otherwise `public`)?
* What happens if a server receives the event late (delayed federation or backfill, for example) and the membership of the remote rooms have since changed — how do we express that we care about the membership at a specific point in time when we don't have a means of knowing any of the event IDs in the remote rooms (or history visibility may prevent us from seeing them)?

Reviewer 5: I think there's a misunderstanding here. I think I see your concern, and we're very deliberately designing this to *avoid* needing to do cross-room auth operations.

The first point is that from the point of view of the *auth rules*, `restricted` is identical to `public`. That is to say, the only change to `https://spec.matrix.org/unstable/rooms/v1/#authorization-rules` is that item 5.5 changes to:

> If the `join_rule` is `public` _or `restricted`_, allow.

Indeed, when we were first drafting this MSC, we considered not bothering with a new `join_rules` state and just using `allow` (see the first entry under "Alternatives", below), but we decided on balance that was more confusing.

The "additional caveat" ("servers must check the `allow` rules") does *not* apply during event auth - the words "before *generating* a `join` event" were carefully chosen. In other words, those checks are made on the server handling the `/_matrix/client/.../join` request, and/or the `/_matrix/federation/v1/make_join` request, as appropriate, *and not thereafter*.

@clokep I wonder if we can come up with a way of rephrasing this sentence to make it clearer.

Reviewer 9: What makes this different than than `public` then, genuinely?

What i see here is an emphasis on the local server doing this check, but in my opinion, in matrix, this is the equivalent of front-end validation.

Author: This bit is meant to be a summary, not a full description of what the `restricted` join rule does. Is the section above not clear? It seems the section above doesn't explicitly say that the auth rules should be treated as `public`, but besides that it seems to pretty clearly say that the `allow` rules are checked during `/join` / `/make_join` / `/send_join` requests.

Author: I've added a bit more to the section above this that describes the auth rules for `restricted rooms`.

Reviewer 8: I'm much happier with the clarification that this only takes place on `/join`, `/make_join` and `/send_join` and doesn't fundamentally change the closed-loop nature of the event auth.

  but with the additional caveat that servers must check the `allow` rules before
  generating a `join` event (whether for a local or a remote user).

## Security considerations

The `allow` feature for `join_rules` places increased trust in the servers in the
room. We consider this acceptable: if you don't want evil servers randomly
joining spurious users into your rooms, then:

> 1. Don't let evil servers in your room in the first place

Reviewer 8: This is an unreliable premise. What if servers were already in the room that turned evil later?

Reviewer 10: Also see https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/3083#discussion_r641539299

Reviewer 5: well, let's consider the existing situation. If we wanted to have a room restricted to certain users, we would have an invite-only room, with the expectation that only people who were meant to be there got an invite. We might well have users on multiple servers in that room.

Now suppose one of the servers in the invite-only room turns evil. It can just start dishing out invites to all its shady mates, who can now join with impunity.

So unless I'm missing something, I don't think there is a material difference for servers to be evil. It's a valid concern, but I don't think it's necessary to solve it for this MSC.

Author: I attempted to expand this section a bit in 39b9a9d582cb8eb9ef9295861202dc676acdd66d to at least ensure these concerns made it into the MSC.

Reviewer 10: @richvdh In your example the server of the invite-only room that turns evil needs to have enough power to invite other users, right? That's not the case with this MSC afaict.

Reviewer 5: yeees, that's true, though I'd be very surprised if people were currently routinely doing the manipulation needed with PLs to restrict invite power. If that is a concern, then I guess that brings us back to your suggestion linked to above, where we have a list of servers who are allowed to make join events. My instinct is to omit that for now, and consider it for a future extension.

Even then, my feeling is that once you've got an evil server in your invite-only room, you're basically in a mess. Even if the evil server can't generate join events, they can still copy all the content in the room to people who shouldn't be able to see it, etc.

Author: Note that matrix-org/synapse#6834 increased the default invite power level to 50. So in new-ish rooms most users won't have the PLs needed to issue invites.

Reviewer 6: Considering the usecases for Spaces, particularly private ones, it's not infeasible for a server to become evil overnight. Private spaces are likely to be used by teams and companies, which means we really should have security by default for when those teams want to remove an employee from their organization, or when employees become malicious prior to leaving the company on their own. Plus, convincing your previous coworker to become evil and quietly bring you in is pretty easy in large enough teams.

I really don't think this is a reasonable expectation to put on room admins to keep in mind.

Reviewer 5: >Plus, convincing your previous coworker to become evil

In this example, is the former coworker still employed (and hence a source of leaks even if not invites) or not (in which case they should be kicked from the room and are therefore irrelevant here)?

Reviewer 6: That's a bit of an aside to my point, but yes: they'd still be employed. The protocol shouldn't be making it easier to shuffle things out of the room that were never meant to leave.

Reviewer 8: > Now suppose one of the servers in the invite-only room turns evil. It can just start dishing out invites to all its shady mates, who can now join with impunity.

To an extent this is true, yes, but the invite PL would at least stop other servers from accepting invites from members who are not empowered to send them. I wonder if that would be enough to limit damage, even if it forks the room.

I suppose what I am envisaging is more some kind of split-brain or collusion where either servers disagree on the join rule for some reason (think federation delay or state reset) or a resident server in the room just turns evil and decides not to perform the checks on `/make_join` and `/send_join`. Someone could then join via that server and then all other servers just have to deal with it and accept the join. 

I assume there are knock-on effects here for encrypted rooms? If this actually happened in an E2EE room, we would presumably just start sharing keys with the newly joined server so we can't even depend on E2EE to prevent leaks?

Reviewer 9: Yes, because to the clients, it'd look like a legitimate join.

Author: Having thought a bit more about this and discussing with @richvdh I think we'll want to tighten this up a bit. The only reasonable solution I have is @timokoesters of requiring the joins to be signed by one of the servers listed in the `via` (meaning that they essentially become authorization servers). This has a few outcomes:

1. Increased centralization due to servers potentially being unable to join additional users to the room even when already in the room. It likely makes sense in this case. (E.g. if you have a company space you probably only want your company's server to be able to approve joins.)
2. This makes the edge case of attempting to join via a server which doesn't know if you're in the space a little bitter. (Since now that's just a non-nonsensical configuration if one of the `via` servers isn't in the space.)
3. Limits the impact of "evil" servers unless they're listed in the `via`. (In which case the situation is as above, but you could kick servers off that list.)

Implementation-wise, this is a bit hairy though so we'll need to:

1. Modify the auth rules to assert the proper signature exists.
    * I *think* this will need to compare the signatures of the join to the `via` servers resolved from the state for the join event.
    * I'm unsure if this could cause split-brained rooms (or another flaw with someone purposefully choosing old events to base their join on).
2. Modify the local join logic to do a remote join in more situations. (We might also need to do something the list of servers provided to the `/join` endpoint if they don't align with the servers in `via`.)
	* This has some unknowns in it, but I'm sure those are surmountable. Hopefully it doesn't introduce too many edge-cases.

Is there anything else missing from this? It is rather a big change so I don't want to embark on an epic journey of implementation without a bit of buy-in. @neilalexander / @timokoesters / @turt2live  does this assuage your concerns (or bring up new ones)? (I can attempt to write this up into the MSC before you answer that if you'd prefer.)

Reviewer 10: This looks good to me. I don't think it will lead to split rooms, but if an evil server is in `via` at some point, it can allow joins even after being removed from `via` again by choosing an old event to base the join on (like you said). I think this is acceptable.

Reviewer 6: it would probably alleviate a lot of the concerns, though we should consider the client design aspect in this as well. Specifically, how would a user-friendly client expose this information to the user?

Reviewer 5: I'm not sure that it necessarily makes sense for the trusted-server list to be defined by those in the `via` list. It feels a bit magical. Why not have separate lists?

Reviewer 5: we'll also need to modify the way the join dance works a little. Right now, the resident server signs the join event in `make_join`, but that signature is then invalidated because the joining server modifies the join event (eg, it changes `origin_server_ts`). I don't think any of those modifications are particularly important, so we might be able to ditch them.

Author: > I'm not sure that it necessarily makes sense for the trusted-server list to be defined by those in the `via` list. It feels a bit magical. Why not have separate lists?

Fair enough, I suppose having them be different might make sense, since the `via` is technically how you could join the space (or whatever room you're delegating access from). `authorised_servers` or something?

Reviewer 9: What about `gatekeepers`? It's a tad shorter.

Reviewer 8: > requiring the joins to be signed by one of the servers listed in the `via`

I like this approach, as it will at least ensure that not just anyone in the room can turn evil.

> Modify the auth rules to assert the proper signature exists.
> ...
> I'm unsure if this could cause split-brained rooms (or another flaw with someone purposefully choosing old events to base their join on).

Since the `join_rules` event should be in the auth chain of the membership event already, we have everything we need to auth the event "as is".

Then we just need to make sure that the same check is done again against the current state in the soft-fail checks, which is the primary mechanism for guarding against state changes when old events are referenced.

Reviewer 10: @richvdh

> we'll also need to modify the way the join dance works a little. Right now, the resident server signs the join event in make_join

Can't we sign the event in send_join?

Reviewer 5: >>we'll also need to modify the way the join dance works a little. 
> Can't we sign the event in send_join?

yes, that would work too. The joining server needs to get a copy of the signed event back so you'd have to add that to the `send_join` response.

Making sure the event gets signed isn't hard, I'm just reminding people it needs a tweak to make it work right.

Author: I've pushed a fairly major update of this, which I think takes into account what people have said above. 👍

Author: From a few discussions focused on how a user would interact with this feature it seems like it might not be the best solution. A room admin would need to understand quite low-level protocol details in order to understand what the list of "authorised servers" are. (The main confusion is that the servers are being trusted to authorise the joins, while it would be easy to confuse this with limiting to users from a server.)

An alternative solution would be to automatically authorise the servers from users who are able to issue invites. The rationale for tying this to the invite power-level is that those users can already issue invites to get new users into the room, so their servers can already join members to the room (skipping the allow rules checking).

The benefits to this approach is that the room admin would not need to manually manage a list of authorised servers (which could also go out of date).

This does have the same issues that one of the servers must be in the spaces in order to properly authorise the join.

An alternative alternative might be to use "room admins" instead, but that's a harder definition to  pin down.

I would be curious if anyone has thoughts on any major issues this might cause? I think my main concern is that it is a bit magical, but overall I think equating the invite power level to who can authorise users to join the room is reasonable.

Author: I've made the above change. I'm going to resolve this thread.

but in that case it seems clearer to introduce the `restricted` join rule, as
described above.

Using an `allow` key with `invite` join rules to broaden who can join was rejected
as an option since it requires weakening the [auth rules](https://spec.matrix.org/unstable/rooms/v1/#authorization-rules).
From the perspective of the auth rules, the `restricted` join rule is identical
to `public` (since the checking of whether a member is in the room is done during
the call to `/join` or `/make_join` / `/send_join` regardless).

## Future extensions

### Checking room membership over federation

If a server is not in a room (and thus doesn't know the membership of a room) it
cannot enforce membership of a room during a join. Peeking over federation,
as described in [MSC2444](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2444),
could be used to establish if the user is in any of the proper rooms.

Note that there are additional security considerations with this, namely that
the peek server has significant power. For example, a poorly chosen peek
server could lie about the room membership and add an `@evil_user:example.org`
to a room to gain membership to a room.

> This MSC recommends rejecting the join in this case and allowing the requesting

Reviewer 8: This is contradictory to above, where we suggest that the join rule otherwise acts as `public`.

Reviewer 5: (That said: this sentence is a bit confusing. We're in the 'Future extensions' section so I assume this isn't a normative part of the MSC, but "This MSC recommends" makes it sound like implementations are expected to carry out this behaviour from day one.)

```suggestion
A future solution to this might be to reject the join in this case and allow the requesting
```

Author: This sentence was meant to be a summary of previous behavior already discussed in the MSC (about the `/make_join` case, yes).

Author: I've attempted to clarify that this section is only talking about `/make_join` / `/send_join`, not about receiving events over federation.

Reviewer 8: I think I'm happy enough to resolve this conversation on the basis that it's the same clarification from above.

homeserver to ask another homeserver.

### Kicking users out when they leave the allowed space

In the above example, suppose `@bob:server.example` leaves `!users:example.org`:
should they be removed from the room? Likely not, by analogy with what happens

> when you switch the join rules from public to invite. Join rules currently govern

Reviewer 8: It's worth noting here that there are all sorts of cases where a server may need to auth these joins *later*, e.g. because they were delayed over federation, backfilled or pulled in as an auth event for another future event. This should be a pure operation and shouldn't yield different results if ran at different times — we can't make this guarantee if we depend on mutable external state.

Reviewer 5: absolutely; this constraint is one of the things that makes this whole area harder to solve than it seems like it should be at first brush.

Author: I think in the current form this *is* true. A server does not need access to any other state in order to auth those joins later.

Author: I believe I've included a note about this now.

allowed to join without an invite. Each entry is expected to be an object with the
following keys:

* `type`: `"m.room_membership"` to describe that we are allowing access via room
  membership. Future MSCs may define other types.
* `room_id`: The room ID to check the membership of.

Any entries in the list which do not match the expected format are ignored. Thus,
if all entries are invalid, the list behaves as if empty and all users without
an invite are rejected.

When an homeserver receives a `/join` request from a client or a `/make_join` /
`/send_join` request from another homeserver, the request should only be permitted
if the user has a valid invite or is in one of the listed rooms. If the user is
not a member of at least one of the rooms, the homeserver should return an error
response with HTTP status code of 403 and an `errcode` of `M_FORBIDDEN`.

It is possible for a homeserver receiving a `/make_join` / `/send_join` request
to not know if the user is in any of the allowed room (due to not participating
in them). In this case the homeserver should reject the join, the requesting
server may wish to attempt to join via another homeserver. If no servers are in

> an allowed room its membership cannot be checked (and this is a misconfiguration).

Reviewer 6: slight clarification: I assume the server should still try to let the user in if it can. For example, if 1/2 of the rooms is unknown (making 1/2 known), and the user is joined to the known room, then the request can go through. 

Or in other words: this sounds like it's making the default assumption that a user is not joined to rooms which are unknown, I think?

Author: > this sounds like it's making the default assumption that a user is not joined to rooms which are unknown, I think?

I think this is the gist of it, yes. If the homeserver doesn't know if a user is in a room or not, it assumes the user is not.

Note that the user only has to be in a single allowed room to be able to join, so if the server is in *one* of the rooms it can be useful.

Reviewer 6: 👍 what are the chances that can be clarified a bit in the MSC? 😇

Author: I'll take a look!

Author: I attempted to clarify this a bit, but this paragraph pairs with the one above it which is fairly clear that a user only has to be in a single room to be allowed to join.

> From the perspective of the [auth rules](https://spec.matrix.org/unstable/rooms/v1/#authorization-rules),

Reviewer 6: note for future spec PR writer: update this (and other links) to point at stable versions for historical reasons. It currently redirects to the unstable version due to lack of release.

Author: It seems that https://matrix.org/docs/spec/#complete-list-of-room-versions links to https://matrix.org/docs/spec/rooms/v1.html which eventually redirects to https://spec.matrix.org/unstable/rooms/v1/#authorization-rules.

So I don't think there's something better to link to?

Reviewer 6: sorry, this is effectively a note to self. No action needed on your part.

the `restricted` join rule has the same behavior as `public`, with the additional
caveat that servers must ensure that:

* The user's previous membership was `invite` or `join`, or
* The `m.room.member` event with a `membership` of `join` has a valid signature

>   from a homeserver whose users have the power to issue invites.

Author: This implies that the auth events of the `m.room.member` event needs to include an event which "proves" that the homeserver has the power to invite other users. This pretty much means:

* The power levels event.
* A membership event of any user on the homeserver which is > minimum invite PL.

This should probably be made a bit more explicit here.

Author: It also means that the server who has `/send_join` called on it needs to add their signature to the membership event. This doesn't seem to be required by the spec, but seems like a good idea regardless?

Reviewer 6: This sounds like a good thing to do indeed. The resident server is implicitly accepting the event on behalf of the joining server anyways, so it might as well stamp that approval on the event it is sending. The signature additionally wouldn't affect the actual state event (due to all signatures being excluded when verifying any particular signature), so is doubly safe.

As normal, the above check is also performed against the current room state during
[soft-failure](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/server_server/r0.1.4#soft-failure),
to guard against servers issuing new membership events by referencing old
events in the room.

Note that the homeservers whose users can issue invites are trusted to confirm
that the `allow` rules were properly checked (since this cannot easily be
enforced over federation by event authorisation).<sup id="a3">[3](#f3)</sup>

## Summary of the behaviour of join rules

See the [join rules](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/client_server/r0.6.1#m-room-join-rules)
specification for full details; the summary below is meant to highlight the differences
between `public`, `invite`, and `restricted`.

> * `public`: anyone can join, subject to `ban` and `server_acls`, as today.

Reviewer 6: can probably hoist "subject to ban and acls" out to the list's intro paragraph to make it a bit easier to parse the list. At the MSC level we're more concerned with the idea, so acknowledging that there are conditions which prevent all join rules from working is more than enough to cover the implicit bases of join rules.

* `invite`: only people with membership `invite` can join, subject to `ban` and
  `server_acls`, as today.
* `knock`: the same as `invite`, except anyone can knock, subject to `ban` and
  `server_acls`. See [MSC2403](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2403).
* `private`: This is reserved, but unspecified.
* `restricted`: the same as `public`, with the additional caveat that servers must
  verify the `m.room.member` event is signed by a homeserver whose users may issue
  invites if the joining member was not previously invited or joined into the room.

## Security considerations

Increased trust to enforce the join rules during calls to `/join`, `/make_join`,

> and `/send_join` is placed in the homeservers whose users can issue invites.

Reviewer 11: This has an impact on the way via parameter should be computed when adding a room to a space. E.g a m.space.child content should provides a list of home server that would be trusted in order for joins to work when exploring a space directory.
Clients / Admins should maintain the via list to be valid?

Author: I added a note about this.

Although it is possible for those homeservers to issue a join event in bad faith,
there is no real-world benefit to doing this as those homeservers could easily
side-step the restriction by issuing an invite first anyway.

## Unstable prefix

The `restricted` join rule will be included in a future room version to allow
servers and clients to opt-into the new functionality.

> During development, an unstable room version of `org.matrix.msc3083` will be used.

Reviewer 6: does this need to be bumped to `org.matrix.msc3083.v2` or `v18` or whatever to denote any potential difference in the algorithm usage? (room versions are meant to be frozen, even development ones, so if `org.matrix.msc3083` had the potential for use in the wild then it'll need a bump to ensure maximum safety of those rooms)

Author: We can bump it, but I have no intention of supporting the previous version, so those rooms would become unjoinable. That's probably OK though in this case.

Reviewer 6: Dropping the old version is completely acceptable - just avoiding a scenario where one server thinks it's running one kind of unstable and another thinks its running another kind.

an invite are rejected.

When an homeserver receives a `/join` request from a client or a `/make_join` /
`/send_join` request from another homeserver, the request should only be permitted
if the user has a valid invite or is in one of the listed rooms. If the user is
not a member of at least one of the rooms, the homeserver should return an error
response with HTTP status code of 403 and an `errcode` of `M_FORBIDDEN`.

It is possible for a homeserver receiving a `/make_join` / `/send_join` request
to not know if the user is in any of the allowed room (due to not participating
in them). In this case the homeserver should reject the join, the requesting
server may wish to attempt to join via another homeserver. If no servers are in
an allowed room its membership cannot be checked (and this is a misconfiguration).

From the perspective of the [auth rules](https://spec.matrix.org/unstable/rooms/v1/#authorization-rules),
the `restricted` join rule has the same behavior as `public`, with the additional
caveat that servers must ensure that:

* The user's previous membership was `invite` or `join`, or
* The `m.room.member` event has a valid signature from a homeserver whose users

>   have the power to issue invites.

Author: Yes, I'll clarify!

> The above check must also be performed against the current room state to potentially
> soft-fail the event. This is the primary mechanism for guarding against state
> changes when old events are referenced. (E.g. if the power levels change, a
> server should not be able to issue new membership events by referencing an old
> event in the room.)

Reviewer 5: I think I'd rephrase this to make it clear it's just the obvious extension of the existing soft-fail checks:

```suggestion
The above check is also performed against the current room state during
[soft-failure](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/server_server/r0.1.4#soft-failure),
to guard against servers issuing new membership events by referencing old
events in the room.
```

Author: Fair! Thank you for finding the cross-ref!

Note that the homeservers whose users can issue invites are trusted to confirm
that the `allow` rules were properly checked (since this cannot easily be
enforced over federation by event authorisation).<sup id="a3">[3](#f3)</sup>

## Summary of the behaviour of join rules

See the [join rules](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/client_server/r0.6.1#m-room-join-rules)

> specification for full details, the summary below is meant to highlight the differences

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
specification for full details; the summary below is meant to highlight the differences
```

between `public`, `invite`, and `restricted`.

* `public`: anyone can join, subject to `ban` and `server_acls`, as today.
* `invite`: only people with membership `invite` can join, subject to `ban` and
  `server_acls`, as today.
* `knock`: the same as `invite`, except anyone can knock, subject to `ban` and
  `server_acls`. See [MSC2403](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2403).
* `private`: This is reserved, but unspecified.
* `restricted`: the same as `public`, with the additional caveat that servers must
  verify the `m.room.member` event is signed by a homeserver whose users may issue
  invites if the joining member was not previously invited or joined into the room.

## Security considerations

Increased trust to enforce the join rules during calls to `/join`, `/make_join`,
and `/send_join` is placed in the homeservers whose users can issue invites.
Although it is possible for those homeservers to issue a join event in bad faith,
there is no real-world benefit to doing this as those homeservers could easily

> side-side the restriction by issuing an invite first anyway.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
side-step the restriction by issuing an invite first anyway.
```

> # Restricting room membership based on space membership

Reviewer 12: The restriction, as mentioned in the MSC, can be applied to any room, not just a space room, also fix the title to the proposal conventions:
```suggestion
# MSC3083: Restricting room membership based on membership to another room
```

Reviewer 9: "to"? shouldn't it be "in"?

Author: The primary use-case is access via a space, the protocol changes do provide a bit more than that though.

A desirable feature is to give room admins the power to restrict membership of
their room based on the membership of one or more spaces from
[MSC1772](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/1772), for example:

> members of the #doglovers space can join this room without an invitation<sup id="a1">[1](#f1)</sup>

## Proposal

A new `join_rule` (`restricted`) will be used to reflect a cross between `invite`
and `public` join rules. The content of the join rules would include the rooms
to trust for membership. For example:

```json
{
    "type": "m.room.join_rules",
    "state_key": "",
    "content": {
        "join_rule": "restricted",
        "allow": [
            {
                "type": "m.room_membership",
                "room": "!mods:example.org",
                "via": ["example.org"]
            },
            {
                "type": "m.room_membership",
                "room": "!users:example.org",
                "via": ["example.org"]
            }
        ]
    }
}
```

This means that a user must be a member of the `!mods:example.org` room or

> `!users:example.org` room in order to join without an invite<sup id="a2">[2](#f2)</sup>.

Reviewer 6: from reading into more of the MSC, it sounds like this is a false assumption. Can we get words to say something along the lines of whether this is invite-only please?

> `!users:example.org` room in order to join without an invite<sup id="a2">[2](#f2)</sup>.

Reviewer 5: I don't really understand the question. 

Non-space-members can receive an explicit invite to a restricted room and join the room that way, as an alternative to complying with the restrictions.

> `!users:example.org` room in order to join without an invite<sup id="a2">[2](#f2)</sup>.

Reviewer 6: The spec bases itself off a concept of rooms being invite only or not for simplicity. Just looking for this MSC to pick either invite only or not to automatically pull in all the behaviors

> `!users:example.org` room in order to join without an invite<sup id="a2">[2](#f2)</sup>.

Author: I'm not really sure I understand the differentiation. As far as I understand if you have an invite you're always allowed to join a room. This MSC doesn't attempt to change that.

> `!users:example.org` room in order to join without an invite<sup id="a2">[2](#f2)</sup>.

Reviewer 6: just looking for words to say whether this fits the "invite-only" description in the spec or not, as right now it's ambiguous.

> `!users:example.org` room in order to join without an invite<sup id="a2">[2](#f2)</sup>.

Author: I don't think it does, but I'm not sure what description you're talking about, I see [here](https://spec.matrix.org/unstable/client-server-api/#room-membership):

> Some rooms require that users be invited to it before they can join; others allow anyone to join. Whether a given room is an “invite-only” room is determined by the room config key `m.room.join_rules`. It can have one of the following values:
> 
> `public` This room is free for anyone to join without an invite.
> 
> `invite` This room can only be joined if you were invited.
> 
> `knock` This room can only be joined if you were invited, and allows anyone to request an invite to the room. Note that this join rule is only available to rooms based upon room version 7.

I would see this as something like:

> `restricted` This room can only be joined if you were invited, and allows anyone who is a member of the allowed rooms to join without an invite.

Is this the section you're talking about, or is there something else?

> `!users:example.org` room in order to join without an invite<sup id="a2">[2](#f2)</sup>.

Reviewer 6: it's a bit spread over the entire spec, so hard to link to. This thread doesn't matter much if the MSC is about to be rewritten.

> `!users:example.org` room in order to join without an invite<sup id="a2">[2](#f2)</sup>.

Author: I've pushed an updated version, I'm hoping it is clearer now.

* `invite`: only people with membership `invite` can join, subject to `ban` and
  `server_acls`, as today.
* `knock`: the same as `invite`, except anyone can knock, subject to `ban` and
  `server_acls`. See [MSC2403](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2403).
* `private`: This is reserved, but unspecified.
* `restricted`: the same as `public` from the perspective of the [auth rules](https://spec.matrix.org/unstable/rooms/v1/#authorization-rules),
  but with the additional caveat that servers must check the `allow` rules before
  generating a `join` event (whether for a local or a remote user).

## Security considerations

The `allow` feature for `join_rules` places increased trust in the servers in the
room. Any server which is joined to the room will be able to issue join events
for the room, there are situations which no individual server in the room can
verify that the membership event was issued in good faith.

We consider this acceptable: if you don't want evil servers randomly joining
spurious users into your rooms, then:

1. Don't let evil servers in your room in the first place
2. Don't use `allow` lists, given the expansion increases the attack surface anyway

>    by letting members in other rooms dictate who's allowed into your room.

Reviewer 6: can this be rephrased? It basically reads as "don't use this feature if you don't like it", which does not leave behind a comforting feeling for this MSC...

to those in the `via` field (or some other list of trusted servers). This is
undesirable since it would increase centralization (e.g. a server already in the
room couldn't issue membership events for another user on that server). It is
unclear that this would significantly increase the security of the room.

## Future extensions

### Checking room membership over federation

If a server is not in a room (and thus doesn't know the membership of a room) it
cannot enforce membership of a room during a call to `/make_join`, or `/send_join`.
Peeking over federation,  as described in [MSC2444](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2444),
could be used to establish if the user is in any of the proper rooms.

Note that there are additional security considerations with this, namely that
the peek server has significant power. For example, a poorly chosen peek
server could lie about the room membership and add an `@evil_user:example.org`
to a room to gain membership to a room.

As iterated above, this MSC recommends rejecting the join, potentially allowing
the requesting homeserver to retry via another homeserver.

> ### Kicking users out when they leave the allowed space

Reviewer 12: ```suggestion
### Kicking users out when they leave the allowed room
```

# Restricting room membership based on space membership

A desirable feature is to give room admins the power to restrict membership of
their room based on the membership of one or more spaces from
[MSC1772](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/1772), for example:

> members of the #doglovers space can join this room without an invitation<sup id="a1">[1](#f1)</sup>

## Proposal

In a future room version a new `join_rule` (`restricted`) will be used to reflect
a cross between `invite` and `public` join rules. The content of the join rules
would include the rooms to trust for membership. For example:

```json
{
    "type": "m.room.join_rules",
    "state_key": "",
    "content": {
        "join_rule": "restricted",
        "allow": [
            {
                "type": "m.room_membership",
                "room_id": "!mods:example.org"
            },
            {
                "type": "m.room_membership",
                "room_id": "!users:example.org"
            }
        ],

>         "authorised_servers": ["example.org"]

Reviewer 7: Given that this field spans all entries in the allow list that now requires that all servers listed here are in all of the rooms listed above, this isn't very flexible

Author: It requires that there's at least one authorized server in each of the rooms.

I assume the alternative is to list authorized servers for each allowed room? The other servers don't know *why* an authorized server is allowing the user into the room so it doesn't make sense to limit them to only allowing for particular room IDs.

E.g. if you have the following allow rules:

* `!abc:foo`
* `!xyz:bar`

With authorised servers of `foo` and `bar`. The `acme` server is also in the room, but not in either `!abc:foo` or `!xyz:bar`.

A new join occurs from `@alice:foo`, it is signed by `foo`. The `acme` server doesn't know whether the user was in `!abc:foo` or `!xyz:bar` (and it doesn't matter since we're trusting the `foo` server to have verified this).

I think decomposing this list into each room isn't technically feasible as the check needs to trust any of them equally anyway, thus it would feel like you're limiting servers to particular rooms, but that isn't possible.

I might be missing something though, so please shout if I am!

Author: This has been removed.

# Restricting room membership based on space membership

A desirable feature is to give room admins the power to restrict membership of

> their room based on the membership of one or more spaces from

Reviewer 13: We should probably clarify that this isn't just for space membership, but allows "members of room A are allowed to join room B".  Use cases include private spaces, potentially room upgrades for private rooms, potentially letting all users in one private room automatically be able to join a sidebar room (or thread-as-room).

Author: I've re-worded this top section to hopefully be clearer!

> their room based on the membership of one or more spaces from

Reviewer 13: ```suggestion
their room based on the membership of one or more rooms.
```

> [MSC1772](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/1772), for example:

Reviewer 13: ```suggestion

```

> > members of the #doglovers space can join this room without an invitation<sup id="a1">[1](#f1)</sup>

Reviewer 13: ```suggestion
> members of the #doglovers:example.com space can join this room without an invitation<sup id="a1">[1](#f1)</sup>
```

## Proposal

> In a future room version a new `join_rule` (`restricted`) will be used to reflect

Reviewer 14: @clokep  I vote for this new `join_rule` option but I disagree about the naming here. 
For me, `restricted` is too strong compared to the actual behavior.
The first time I heard about this feature I believed only the whitelisted people (the "allowed") would be able to join. But the room is still joignable by invite...

Unfortunately, I don't have an obvious suggestion. I would propose "softened_invite", "invite_with_bypass".
For me, this new rule is closer to `invite` than `public` (To argue, "If the `allow` key is an empty list (or not a list at all, , then no users are allowed to join without an invite)

Author: From a user's point of view, the join rule is effectively invite-only, unless your user meets some other parameters.

I think "restricted" encapsulates this nicely, but this isn't really meant to be exposed directly to users and it is up to client UI to describe this accurately.

Reviewer 13: 'restricted' also tripped me up slightly when i first saw it for the same reasons as giom: it sounds as we're restricting who can join in the room in general (even if invited) - rather than who can join without an invite.  It's not a showstopper for me, but I do wonder if we can avoid everyone else in future using the API tripping up over this.

I'm wondering if something like `invite_and_allowed` would be clearer as to what's going on?

Reviewer 13: actually `invite_or_allow` might be better.  although neither capture the idea that the allows are based on room IDs.

Reviewer 13: actually, given `knock` implies that `invited` users are allowed in anyway, we don't need the `invite_or` thing.  So `allowed` is a bit better here - given it directly points you towards the `allow` list for who is allowed to join the room.   Not sure the advantage is sufficient to make it worth changing at this point though (especially if we ever added a `deny` list).  So I think we should keep it as `restricted`, after all that.

Reviewer 13: having read through the rest of this, i really think we should switch to `allowed` - it conjures up the idea of expanding the `invite`-only room to also support certain `allowed` users, and matches the `allow` list.

Reviewer 13: having slept on this, i'm now worried that `allowed` just seems weird without context. "join_rule is allowed" makes it sound that anyone is allowed to join, rather than it being restricted to a subset of users (+explicitly invited users).

So I've gone full circle again and am back at preferring `restricted`. let's leave it there.

Author: Thanks for thinking through this. As I mentioned over Matrix I'm not a big fan of the `invite_or` thing since inviting is allowed in all rooms (and e.g. `knock` isn't `knock_or_invite`). I'd be OK with changing it to `allowed`, but I think that does sound too similar to `public`.

Unless someone can come up with a good alternative I think the best bet is to leave it as `restricted`.

It also came up in our conversation that in the future we may want to add different types of rules to `allow`, so I don't want to tie it too closely to the current proposal (e.g. `delegated` was thrown around).

            {
                "type": "m.room_membership",
                "room_id": "!mods:example.org"
            },
            {
                "type": "m.room_membership",
                "room_id": "!users:example.org"
            }
        ]
    }
}
```

This means that a user must be a member of the `!mods:example.org` room or
`!users:example.org` room in order to join without an invite<sup id="a2">[2](#f2)</sup>.
Membership in a single allowed room is enough.

If the `allow` key is an empty list (or not a list at all), then no users are
allowed to join without an invite. Each entry is expected to be an object with the
following keys:

* `type`: `"m.room_membership"` to describe that we are allowing access via room
  membership. Future MSCs may define other types.
* `room_id`: The room ID to check the membership of.

Any entries in the list which do not match the expected format are ignored. Thus,
if all entries are invalid, the list behaves as if empty and all users without
an invite are rejected.

When an homeserver receives a `/join` request from a client or a `/make_join` /
`/send_join` request from another homeserver, the request should only be permitted

> if the user has a valid invite or is in one of the listed rooms. If the user is

Reviewer 13: ```suggestion
if the user has a valid invite or is joined to one of the listed rooms. If the user is
```

pedantry: make it clear that you have to be actively `join`ed in the listed room, not just invited or parted.

not a member of at least one of the rooms, the homeserver should return an error
response with HTTP status code of 403 and an `errcode` of `M_FORBIDDEN`.

It is possible for a homeserver receiving a `/make_join` / `/send_join` request

> to not know if the user is in some of the allowed room (due to not participating

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
to not know if the user is in some of the allowed rooms (due to not participating
```

in them). Any allow room that the homeserver cannot verify the membership should
be treated as if the user is not in that room. If the user is not in any of the

> rooms (or some of the rooms cannot be verified) the homeserver should reject the

Reviewer 13: Perhaps we should use a different error code if the user was rejected but the server couldn't check all the `allowed` rooms? e.g. `M_UNKNOWN_ALLOWED_ROOM` or something?  This could then be used to go try to join via other servers.

Reviewer 13: Presumably we also need an `M_CANT_ALLOW` or something to show if the reason the join failed was because the server doesn't have permission to send the join?

Author: Hm. Do you think we need different error codes in those situations? I think the joining server's behavior is the same, but I guess for clarity it is best to keep them separate.

Author: I think 7caff82b and 55b99d29 capture this. We can bikeshed the names...

join, as above. The requesting server may wish to attempt to join via another
homeserver. If no servers are in any of the allowed rooms its membership cannot

> be verified (and this is a misconfiguration).

Reviewer 15: How do we signal that the joining server should try another server? If it receives a 403 I think it gives up immediately?

Reviewer 15: Do we need to be concerned about the case where there is only a couple of servers in a large ish room that can handle a `/send_join`? Currently for public rooms Synapse sets the invite level in the default power levels to 50, so that only admins and mods can invite, which really narrows down the list of servers that can be used to join via.

E.g. say we had an Element internal room which I on jki.re created, but wanted to allow other Element employees to join, so I add the Element employee space to the list of accepted spaces. Since its an Element room I give it an alias on the company HS. After a while lots of people from different servers are joined. How does a new server join the room? Using the server of the canonical alias won't work, and the likelihood of randomly trying jki.re seems small?

Reviewer 11: Most common use case would probably be that Element employees discover the room via the space directory, in this case the m.space.child event contains a list of via servers, they would use that

Author: The common case is that the `m.space.child` event would contain it, or perhaps a matrix.to link with the proper `via` servers setup.

> How do we signal that the joining server should try another server? If it receives a 403 I think it gives up immediately?

This is somewhat unsolved in the server-server spec in general, it is unclear what are transient failures vs. something else. We could add a separate error code for being unable to verify vs. being able to verify you cannot join.

Reviewer 6: This definitely sounds like the unsolved "how do you join a room reliably" problem, which is out of scope for this MSC imo. Currently, spaces do provide the options mentioned by others, but if those fail then you're kinda on your own to get an alternative alias from someone.

Reviewer 13: I think this thread is resolved for the question of "how do I find a server to try to join via?".  I've opened a separate thread for the error codes.

Reviewer 15: I guess this is maybe fine ish so long as:

1. When clients add a room to a space they correctly include the right servers as candidate servers (i.e. the intersection of users with invite power and who are in the space);
2. When clients send a alias/matrix.to link they also include the correct candidate servers; and
3. Servers that responds to alias lookups do their best to filter candidate servers to the right ones (where possible).

I think those things should be mentioned in the MSC and spec, as otherwise I think this feature is going to be *super* flakey if clients don't do the right thing.

-- 

> This definitely sounds like the unsolved "how do you join a room reliably" problem, which is out of scope for this MSC imo. 

I think the difference is that we're potentially making that problem much worse here. For normal rooms there is a really good chance that at least the canonical alias is going to be work fine for a long period of time. My worry is that aliases just won't work reliably for large restricted rooms, which would be a) frustrating for users and b) cause users to lose trust in Matrix as a reliable service. 

However, I *think* the above mitigations might be enough to ensure that links at least reliably, and aliases on servers that are in the room and space?

Author: Your first point is already included in the section "Interaction with `m.space.child` events", but I can expand that to include the second point.

We should include something about updating the alias lookup to respond with the correct servers though. 👍

Author: I've expanded the client considerations section a bit and also mentioned that homeservers should use the authorised servers, not the candidate servers, when joining a room. The Synapse implementation already did this. 😄 

Done in 290f9032f4c4b0d87b3290ab2f0c5d3c24262eb2.

From the perspective of the [auth rules](https://spec.matrix.org/unstable/rooms/v1/#authorization-rules),

> the `restricted` join rule has the same behavior as `public`, with the additional

Reviewer 14: Don't you think possible to describe this new rule has a join rule with the same behavior as `invite` with additional caveat?
You may then remove "The user's previous membership was `invite` or `join`,"  from the additional caveat

Author: As this paragraph describes it is closer to `public` than `invite`, *from the perspective of the auth rules*.

From a user's perspective it is somewhere in-between.

caveat that servers must ensure that:

* The user's previous membership was `invite` or `join`, or
* The `m.room.member` event with a `membership` of `join` has a valid signature
  from a homeserver whose users have the power to issue invites. This implies
  that:

>     * A join event issued via `/make_join` & `/send_join` is signed by the not

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    * A join event issued via `/make_join` & `/send_join` is signed by not
```

      just the requesting server, but also the resident server. (This seems like
      an improvement regardless since the resident server is accepting the event
      on behalf of the joining server and ideally this should be verifiable after

>       the fact, even for current room versions.)

Reviewer 15: Does `/send_join` return the join event again? As when the joining server calls `/send_join` with the event its hasn't yet been signed by the remote.

Author: It does not seem to get returned (it seems only the auth events and room state *prior to the join event* are returned).

Reviewer 15: I guess it would be easy enough to add the newly signed event to the response of `/send_join`. Though it does mean that the local server can't/shouldn't persist the join event until *after* it received the `/send_join` response.

    * The auth chain of the join event needs to include an event which proves
      the homeserver can be issuing the join. This can be done by including the
      `m.room.power_levels` event and an `m.room.member` event with `membership`

>       equal to `join` for a member who could issue invites from that server.

Reviewer 15: Something that has cropped up during implementation is that its no longer possible to tell a) which state is required to auth an event and b) which servers are required to have signed the event, by only looking at the event itself.

Knowing which state (i.e. type/state key tuples) needed to authenticate an event is used to reduce the amount of state pulled from the DB during authentication (and state res v2) to just three or so events, which really helps performance. The current proposal would require pulling out potentially all membership events in the room for servers that signed the event, which is less than ideal.

When verifying signatures for events the server currently needs to know *which* servers must have signed the event, this proposal complicates that as the server needs to fetch the auth events and then figure out which of those memberships events is the one included for the purposes of allowing the join due to the sender being in a valid space. I *think* this is a well specified lookup (you drop the other membership auth events that are there for other reasons, which for joins are probably just invites), but it complicates things a bit (and means we need to be careful when adding new rules so that this lookup remains well specified).

On top of that, MSC1228 is a thing we want, which removes server signatures from events and replaces them with per-user signatures.

So to make life easier on all those points I propose that we add a `joined_via_users_server: <user_id>` field that specifies *which* user is being added to the auth events, and thus which server needs to sign the event and what state is required to auth the event.

Author: So by specifying a user here this let's us quickly know which tuple to pull out of the state when verifying?

A potential issue I see with this is that (I think) it could cause an event to be soft-failed if that particular user is no longer in the room when a new server joins.

Consider:

* `@authorizer:hs1`, a user who can issue invites
* `@joiner:hs2` joins and the event is signed via hs1 since `@authorizer:hs1` can issue invites
* Time passes, `@authorizer:hs1` leaves the room and has their PL demoted
* `@third:hs3` joins the room (doesn't matter how)

Is hs3 able to properly validate the join event of `@joiner:hs2`? It is valid in the context of when the join event happened, but not when hs3 joins.

Maybe this is a case which already works in state-res and I'm missing something!

Reviewer 13: i think the thought experiment here is the same as if `authorizer` simply invited `joiner` and then left.  This scenario handled by state res fine; later users can still auth `joiner` despite `authorizer` being no more.

That said, I don't understand why @erikjohnston wants to add a `joined_via_users_server` rather than just a `joined_via_server` field. Why do we care which user_id was used to allow the join?  (And doesn't this imply that a single user_id is responsible, whereas there could multiple admins on the server which allows the join)?  Don't we only care about the server?

Reviewer 15: Yup, that example is basically the same as normal invites, which works fine (when doing state res we pull in the auth chain, and so the hs2 join will pull in the hs1 invite/join correctly).

> That said, I don't understand why @erikjohnston wants to add a `joined_via_users_server` rather than just a `joined_via_server` field. Why do we care which user_id was used to allow the join? (And doesn't this imply that a single user_id is responsible, whereas there could multiple admins on the server which allows the join)? Don't we only care about the server?

Right now we have a function for going from an event to the list of types/state keys required to auth the event (and thus be added as the event's `auth_events`). This MSC breaks that, as we now have a requirement for "a join event for a user that has invite privs" , and adding a `joined_via_server` doesn't help that. This is a problem for two reasons:

1. The amount of state to pull out of the DB to auth the join event is no longer bounded (we'd need to pull out all member events for the server), which is a performance problem for both event auth and state res.
2. Turns out the state res algorithm relies on the existence of a well defined mapping, in particular in the "Iterative auth checks" section:

   > If a `(event_type, state_key)` key that is required for checking the authorization rules is not present in the state, then the appropriate state event from the event’s `auth_events` is used if the auth event is not rejected.

   We could update the algorithm to say something like "if an event doesn't pass auth based on state, shove in any extra auth events and see if it passes then" or something.

---

TBH, if we're serious about MSC1228 then we're going to need to do this on a per user basis anyway, which is a compelling argument for me :shrug:

Reviewer 13: okay, ack. (and we are serious about #1228, or its successor #2787). hadn't twigged that we needed to know the specific join event for the user with invite privs, but makes sense now.

@clokep: sounds like adding `joined_via_user` or `join_granted_by_user` solves this one?

Author: Yeah, @erikjohnston and I had a conversation about this and I think that's the way forward. It simplifies a couple of things in the implementation!

Author: Taking a look at implementing this, I think the resident server needs to add the additional info to the content during the call to `/make_join` so that it gets signed by the joining server, unfortunately the spec allows the joining server to then using a *different resident server* for the `/send_join` call. So you could end up with `joined_via_user: @alice:hs1`, but the event signed by `hs2`.

I guess we could forbid that behavior here, but I'm unsure if I'm missing something?

Author: This should be added in 290f9032f4c4b0d87b3290ab2f0c5d3c24262eb2 and ffb9095c82672c49f2a500797cd10a919495ea4a. The Synapse PR was also updated with this information.

As normal, the above check is also performed against the current room state during
[soft-failure](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/server_server/r0.1.4#soft-failure),
to guard against servers issuing new membership events by referencing old

> events in the room.

Reviewer 10: The security looks good to me now, but soft failure does not guard against state events, let me quote the spec:

> Soft failed events participate in state resolution as normal if further events are received which reference it. It is the job of the state resolution algorithm to ensure that malicious events cannot be injected into the room state via this mechanism.

I think we can just remove this paragraph.

Author: @erikjohnston Do you have any opinions on this?

Reviewer 13: yeah, this sounds right. we're protected against servers emitting new membership events by referencing old events in the room... but the protection doesn't come from soft-fails, but by the overall state resolution algorithm.  So i agree that it'd be clearer to just remove this, given it's saying "it's status quo".

Reviewer 15: Yeah, I think this paragraph is redundant, as we apply the normal auth rules during soft failure.

> The security looks good to me now, but soft failure does not guard against state events

(Ish, it works fine unless another server a) accepts the state event and b) references it when sending a new event.)

Author: I've gone ahead and removed this paragraph. Thanks for the feedback.

Note that the homeservers whose users can issue invites are trusted to confirm
that the `allow` rules were properly checked (since this cannot easily be
enforced over federation by event authorisation).<sup id="a3">[3](#f3)</sup>

## Summary of the behaviour of join rules

See the [join rules](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/client_server/r0.6.1#m-room-join-rules)
specification for full details; the summary below is meant to highlight the differences
between `public`, `invite`, and `restricted`. Note that all join rules are subject
to `ban` and `server_acls`.

* `public`: anyone can join, as today.
* `invite`: only people with membership `invite` can join, as today.

> * `knock`: the same as `invite`, except anyone can knock. See

Reviewer 16: Not sure there is anything that can be done about this, but it feels like being able to `knock` a room that is `restricted` would be useful too, at least in one community I'm in. It's a bit of an edge case for sure and relates more to the Knock MSC than this one, just voicing as a pity that these two valuable features cannot be enabled at the same time. Should have voiced a lot earlier, I know :)

Reviewer 14: @clokep  I agree with @jaywink 
don't you think we just need to add the `allow` key to decline the existing `join_rule` values without adding a new one (event if the `allow` key will be useless for `public`).

If we go that way, I already see other keys to add in the `join_rule` content:
- `authorized_servers` to limit the authorized homeservers from which to join the room
- `unauthorized_servers` to prevent the users of some homeservers from joining

Reviewer 4: I think it is a bit of a shame that we missed fixing this in the knock MSC but I think it can be patched with the changes in this. We can continue using a `restricted` event type but add a `allow_knock` field. Something like this:

```json
{
    "type": "m.room.join_rules",
    "state_key": "",
    "content": {
        "join_rule": "restricted",
        "allow": [{
            "type": "m.room_membership",
            "room_id": "!users:example.org"
        }],
        "allow_knock": [{
            "type": "m.any"
        }]
    }
}
```

You could even compose these to allow members of a (bigger) space to knock.

```json
{
    "type": "m.room.join_rules",
    "state_key": "",
    "content": {
        "join_rule": "restricted",
        "allow": [{
            "type": "m.room_membership",
            "room_id": "!mods:example.org"
        }],
        "allow_knock": [{
            "type": "m.room_membership",
            "room_id": "!users:example.org"
        }]
    }
}
```

I plan on writing an MSC after this is accepted. Hopefully we can then deprecate the `knock` `join_rule`. Maybe even get rid of `public` and `invite` at the same time.

Author: > Not sure there is anything that can be done about this, but it feels like being able to `knock` a room that is `restricted` would be useful too, at least in one community I'm in.

This was discussed a bit amongst the team and we didn't feel there was a real use-case for it. Can you describe a bit further why you think it would be useful?

> don't you think we just need to add the `allow` key to decline the existing `join_rule` values without adding a new one (event if the `allow` key will be useless for `public`).

I think this has been brought up and answered multiple times, see https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/3083#discussion_r641946633 and the alternative section in the MSC.

Reviewer 13: I assume the use case here is that I have a big set of big private rooms, where access is `allowed` to folks in #members.  It's hard to track which members are valid, so they need a way to knock and get in.  Presumably the solution is to make #members knockable.

Alternatively, if the use case is that people need to be able to knock to get into a single big private room (because we want folks to request access to certain private rooms but not others without having to be explicitly being invited), then this is still a gap.

I agree that it feels like a bad smell that we can't mix knocking and `allowed` rooms, but also agree this can be punted to a later MSC.

Reviewer 16: > This was discussed a bit amongst the team and we didn't feel there was a real use-case for it. Can you describe a bit further why you think it would be useful?

We have a community who will mostly be added to one parent space and the plan is for most of the rooms underneath to be then set to `restricted` instead of `invite` (like now). The community then grows down in a tree structure with for example a working group having one or more subgroups underneath it.

```
root (knock)
-- group1 (restricted on root)
---- subgroup1 (restricted on group1)
---- subgroup2 (restricted on group1)
```

This works all fine if members get added to the `root` space (either invitation or knock). But if say someone wants to join the  `subgroup2` room, without being a part of `group1` (or even `root`), then they would not be able to knock themselves in and would need the current "ask for invite" route, which knock aims to solve. `subgroup2` could be made `knock`, but then members of `group1` would not be able to automatically get access.

How would someone know about `subgroup2`? For example by having got an invite to some of the higher level rooms (without being in a space/room granting access) where it is mentioned or the room address being shared outside the community, maybe a call for action for random contributors who want to join this particular one interest group instead of the whole community. Knocking in would then be useful.

I totally agree this should not block this (very very important MSC), but possibly a future MSC could fill this gap somehow.

Author: Thanks for the clarification! It sounds like you want rooms to be discoverable by members of a space, but not directly joinable. (So in your above example you might want anyone from `root` to be able to knock, but any member of `group1` to be able to join or something.)

I haven't explored this in detail and I think it is best to get this simplified form done first and leave this to a future MSC!

  verify the `m.room.member` event is signed by a homeserver whose users may issue
  invites if the joining member was not previously invited or joined into the room.

## Security considerations

Increased trust to enforce the join rules during calls to `/join`, `/make_join`,
and `/send_join` is placed in the homeservers whose users can issue invites.
Although it is possible for those homeservers to issue a join event in bad faith,
there is no real-world benefit to doing this as those homeservers could easily
side-step the restriction by issuing an invite first anyway.

## Unstable prefix

The `restricted` join rule will be included in a future room version to allow
servers and clients to opt-into the new functionality.

During development, an unstable room version of `org.matrix.msc3083.v2` will be used.
Since the room version namespaces the behaviour, the `allow` key and value, as well
as the `restricted` join rule value do not need unstable prefixes.

## Alternatives

It may seem that just having the `allow` key with `public` join rules is enough
(as originally suggested in [MSC2962](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2962)),

> but there are concerns that changing the behaviour of a pre-existing a `public`

Reviewer 13: ```suggestion
but there are concerns that changing the behaviour of a pre-existing `public`
```

[MSC1772: spaces](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/1772),
for example:

> members of the #doglovers space can join this room without an invitation<sup id="a1">[1](#f1)</sup>

## Proposal

A new `join_rule` (`restricted`) will be used to reflect a cross between `invite`
and `public` join rules. The content of the join rules would include the rooms
to trust for membership. For example:

```json
{
    "type": "m.room.join_rules",
    "state_key": "",
    "content": {
        "join_rule": "restricted",
        "allow": [
            {
                "space": "!mods:example.org",
                "via": ["example.org"]
            },
            {
                "space": "!users:example.org",
                "via": ["example.org"]
            }
        ]
    }
}
```

This means that a user must be a member of the `!mods:example.org` space or
`!users:example.org` space in order to join without an invite<sup id="a2">[2](#f2)</sup>.
Membership in a single space is enough.

If the `allow` key is an empty list (or not a list at all), then no users are
allowed to join without an invite. Each entry is expected to be an object with the

> following keys, or a string representing the MXID of the user exempted:

Reviewer 4: Isn't this case identical to `invite`? Why not extend the invite mechanism instead of adding a new type. It seems that adding new types will cause issues in the future as we want to mix? For example what if we want to allow knocking in a room that allows space-based invites? I think we should put an end to this and freeze this list at just `public` and `invite` and add other options for allowing joining by knocks, space member ship and similar. This essentially moves the logic to default public or private with extra rules that allow joining.

Author: For context, this was discussed a bit https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2962/#discussion_r583567946 where the original conversation occurred (unfortunately on a different MSC), I'll copy richvdh's thoughts here though since GitHub makes it hard to find that thread:

> I was struggling to remember why we decided it was better to start with `join_rule: public` and lock it down, rather than `join_rule: invite` and open it up.
>
>I think the answer amounts to: from the perspective of the [auth rules](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/rooms/v1#authorization-rules), the expected behaviour is the same as that of `join_rule: public`, because the `allow` restrictions cannot be enforced post-hoc. If we simply used `invite` here, we would have to weaken the auth rules so that you would no longer need to hold an invite to join the room, which I am reluctant to do.
>
>So, from the auth rules' point of view, `public` makes more sense.
>
> However, as well as joepie91's point about failing safely and making redactions work right, I'm a bit worried that this is going to be very confusing for everybody.
>
> I wonder if, for clarity as much as anything else, we should introduce a different `join_rule` - say, `restricted` - to reflect the fact that what we have is a cross between `invite` and `public`? in this world:
> * `public`: anyone can join, subject to `ban` and `server_acls`, as today
> * `invite`: only people with membership `invite` can join, as today
> * `restricted`: the same as `public` from the perspective of the auth rules, but with the additional caveat that servers are expected to check the `allow` rules before generating a `join` event (whether for a local or a remote user).
>
> Since we're talking about needing a new room version for this anyway, it seems like a reasonable thing to do?

In summary, the idea behind using a new join rule was:
* We didn't want to base it on `invite` since it weakens the auth rules for invite.
* Using a new join rule (and not re-using `public`) brings clarity that this is a combination of `invite` and `public` join rules.

> I think we should put an end to this and freeze this list at just `public` and `invite` and add other options for allowing joining by knocks, space member ship and similar. 

Note that knocking was already accepted into the spec, so this isn't the place to discuss that. I also believe that "freezing" something like join rules is a somewhat unrelated discussion to this.

I'm not sure how using other fields vs. the join rule itself moves the logic. Are you suggesting is that the join rule field should only govern the auth rules and additional fields should be used to modify that? I'm unsure if that's clearer than using a new join rule in this case.

Reviewer 4: I see. I appreciate the reasoning behind that.

> Note that knocking was already accepted into the spec

I did not realize that that had happened 🎉 in that case how would I create a room where anyone can knock, but people in a space can join (without knocking).

---

On a similar note on reducing explosion of `join_rule` types here should we add a `type` field to `allow` such that we can add other ways that someone can join a room without creating another new combination?

Author: > I see. I appreciate the reasoning behind that.

No problem. :)

> > Note that knocking was already accepted into the spec
> 
> I did not realize that that had happened 🎉 in that case how would I create a room where anyone can knock, but people in a space can join (without knocking).

That would not be possible with this proposal.

> On a similar note on reducing explosion of `join_rule` types here

Please can we avoid using words like "explosion", with this proposal there would only be 4 join rules (`public`, `invite`, `knock`, `restricted`). This doesn't seem like a massive amount and takes away from the rest of the point you're making.

> should we add a `type` field to `allow` such that we can add other ways that someone can join a room without creating another new combination?

What would this type be used for? Without a concrete use-case I do not want to make this more complicated.

Reviewer 4: > That would not be possible with this proposal.

This seems like something that we should address. 

> Please can we avoid using words like "explosion"

I'm sorry if that seems extreme. But the problem I am referring to is that it looks like we are entering a combinatorial explosion. While this may propose only one more room it seems like it is already clear that we will need one more for `knock-restricted`. If we add a new method such as `password` we will now need `password`, `restricted-password`, `knock-restricted-password`, `knock-restricted`.

My point is that while it is unfortunate that I didn't see this problem with the knock MSC it seems clear to me that we can't continue down this path.

> What would this type be used for?

I'm not claiming that these are the best proposals but some thoughts:

- password-based joins.
- Joins authorized by OpenID Connect.

I'm quite certain that we will have additional ways to join a room in the future.

Reviewer 5: new restrictions would be implemented with modifications to the `allow` dictionary. I don't think we need to spec those now, and I think that it's overly dramatic to imagine that it will result in `restricted-password` etc.

Reviewer 4: I like the idea that I think you are proposing but `allow` isn't a dictionary.

I think we would either need to:

1. Make `allow` a dictionary and put the current list in `allow.space_members`.
2. Add `allow[*].type` to be able to tell which items are "space member" rules and which are "password" or "knock" rules.

I think I prefer 2. It makes it clear that people matching any of these rules can join.

(Aside: knock is probably slightly different because we may want to restrict who can knock. (It is a separate ACL rather than a part of the join ACL) but that will be dealt with in the MSC that actually adds support for knocking in `restricted` rooms.)

Reviewer 5: I guess having a `type` field in the dictionaries in `allow` list would make things cleaner when we want to add other rule types in future. for now that would always be `"type": "room-membership"` or something. @clokep wdyt?

Author: Having a `type` field there seems fine. An older version of this actually also allowed strings in the `allow` list to directly allow users by MXID, so I think that would make sense.

Author: I've added a `type` field, hopefully that allows for better extensibilitiy.

> Aside: knock is probably slightly different because we may want to restrict who can knock.

I don't know why you wouldn't just allow users in that case (as defined in this MSC), but yeah I don't plan to adapt this to knocking in this MSC.

* `space`: The room ID of the space to check the membership of.
* `via`: A list of servers which may be used to peek for membership of the space.

Any entries in the list which do not match the expected format are ignored.

When a homeserver receives a `/join` request from a client or a `/make_join` / `/send_join`
request from a server, the request should only be permitted if the user has a valid
invite or is in one of the listed spaces. Note that the server may not know if the user
is in a particular space, this is left to a future MSC to solve.

If the user is not part of the proper space, the homeserver should return an error
response with HTTP status code of 403 and an `errcode` of `M_FORBIDDEN`.

Unlike the `invite` join rule, confirmation that the `allow` rules were properly
checked cannot be enforced over federation by event authorization, so servers in

> the room are trusted not to allow invalid users to join.<sup id="a3">[3](#f3)</sup>

Reviewer 10: My proposal to solve this:

Only servers listed in 'via' are allowed to add the new user to the room. You can think of the servers under 'via' as the trusted servers.

This can be enforced by checking if the member event of the new user contains a valid signature from one of the 'via' servers.

Author: Yeah, I think that would add a bit of security to this, I'm unsure if we do any checking of signatures like that in other places though. I'll have to investigate a bit more.

Reviewer 5: consider that there are two users in a room, `@alice:server1` and `@bob:server2`. Only `server1` is in the `via` property. Now `@charlie:server2` wants to join.

According to this change, that join would have to go via `server1` even though `server2` is already in the room. This is an increase in centralisation I'm not entirely happy with.

As the footnote says: it's not obvious that we're really making things any worse than the current state of play with invite-only rooms. I'm not sure this is a tradeoff worth making.

Reviewer 10: I think increased security is the primary reason for this feature to exist in the first place (e.g. companies use it to limit their rooms to members of their space). I think people who want to use this feature, want centralization anyway.

If we do it like the MSC says, companies can't trust other homeservers, so they will probably "Don't let evil servers in your room in the first place" by disabling federation in these rooms entirely.

Author: I think the current version of the MSC handles this security aspect.

behalf of a user in the proper space to see the given information. I.e. the
calling server must be trusted anyway.

## Summary of the behaviour of join rules

See the [join rules](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/client_server/r0.6.1#m-room-join-rules)
specification for full details, but the summary below should highlight the differences
between `public`, `invite`, and `restricted`.

* `public`: anyone can join, subject to `ban` and `server_acls`, as today.
* `invite`: only people with membership `invite` can join, as today.
* `knock`: the same as `invite`, except anyone can knock, subject to `ban` and
  `server_acls`. See [MSC2403](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2403).
* `private`: This is reserved and not implemented.
* `restricted`: the same as `public` from the perspective of the auth rules, but
  with the additional caveat that servers are expected to check the `allow` rules
  before generating a `join` event (whether for a local or a remote user).

## Security considerations

The `allow` feature for `join_rules` places increased trust in the servers in the
room. We consider this acceptable: if you don't want evil servers randomly

> joining spurious users into your rooms, then:

Author: > This has several benefits;
>
> * you can assert, at the time of receiving and in the future, that the user who just joined, at the time of joining, had membership in the other room (as the server can resolve the membership state for the referenced event ID)
> * the server can reject the join (same way as when rejecting an invalid signature) by asserting that the membership in the other room doesn't exist

This makes the assumption that every homeserver in the room has access to the spaces via which users can join from. This might not be true, consider the following:

* A space exists which has the staff of a Acme Corp as members.
* Rooms exist under this space with `restricted` join rules pointing back to the space, each room represents another company that Acme Corp does business with. In this example, consider their relationship with Ajax Corp.
* Users from Ajax Corp are invited to their discussion room with Acme Corp, so you end up with a (`#ajax_support:acme.corp`) which anyone who is a member of `#staff:acme.corp` can join, but also users who were specifically invited (e.g. `@donald:ajax.corp`).
* Acme Corp gets a new employee (`@wile_e:acme.corp`) who joins the room.
* The `ajax.corp` homeserver gets the event, but is unable to verify how they joined since they don't have access to `#staff:acme.corp`.

The opposite is also true, you might want to set it so any user in `#staff:acme.corp` or `#staff:ajax.corp` can join, but they cannot verify each other's membership in that space.

Cross referencing https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/3083/files#r641539299.

> joining spurious users into your rooms, then:

Author: I'm going to resolve this for now since the comment is a bit confusing (as discussed in #matrix-spec:matrix.org). If you can clarify / simplify the concerns, please feel free to reply!

the user is not a member of at least one of the rooms, the homeserver should return
an error response with HTTP status code of 403 and an `errcode` of `M_FORBIDDEN`.

It is possible for a resident homeserver (one which receives a `/make_join` /
`/send_join` request to not know if the user is in some of the allowed rooms (due
to not participating in them). If the user is not in any of the allowed rooms that
are known to the homeserver it should return an error response with HTTP status code
of 400 with an `errcode` of `M_UNABLE_TO_AUTHORISE_JOIN`. The joining server should
attempt to join via another resident homeserver. If the resident homeserver knows
that the user is not in *any* of the allowed rooms it should return an error response
with HTTP status code of 403 and an `errcode` of `M_FORBIDDEN`. Note that it is a
configuration error if there are allowed rooms with no participating authorised
servers.

A chosen resident homeserver might also be unable to issue invites, in this case
it should return an error response with HTTP status code of 400 and an `errcode`
of `M_CANNOT_ALLOW`. The joining server should attempt to join via another

> resident homeserver.

Author: After sleeping on this, I wonder if it makes more sense to use a generic `M_TRY_ANOTHER_HOMESERVER` error instead. This could then get re-used in the future if necessary. *Why* this is happening could be included in the error message.

Does that sound more useful?

Reviewer 5: I think it's probably best to keep the error code explicit, which allows us more flexibility with how we handle the situation in future. :man_shrugging: though.

Reviewer 13: It's a close call, but i'd also veer towards being explicit. `M_CANNOT_ALLOW` is awkward and clumsy and doesn't match with `M_UNABLE_TO_AUTHORISE_JOIN` though.  What about `M_UNABLE_TO_GRANT_JOIN`?

Author: Thanks for the thoughts! I've updated the `M_CANNOT_ALLOW` to `M_UNABLE_TO_GRANT_JOIN`, which sounds an awful lot like `M_UNABLE_AUTHORISE_JOIN`, but... 🤷

From the perspective of the [auth rules](https://spec.matrix.org/unstable/rooms/v1/#authorization-rules),
the `restricted` join rule has the same behavior as `public`, with the additional
caveat that servers must ensure that:

* The user's previous membership was `invite` or `join`, or
* The `m.room.member` event with a `membership` of `join` has a valid signature
  from a homeserver whose users have the power to issue invites. This implies
  that:

    * A join event issued via `/send_join` is signed by not just the requesting
      server, but also the resident server.<sup id="a3">[3](#f3)</sup>

      In order for the joining server to receive the proper signatures the join

>       event will be returned via `/send_join` in the `event` field.

Author: It came up during implementation that it was unclear if this should be done unconditionally or only if the event has extra signatures added, etc.

Author: We decided to do this conditionally in the implementation and leave it to another MSC to always sign them.

    * The auth chain of the join event needs to include an event which proves
      the homeserver can be issuing the join. This can be done by including the
      `m.room.power_levels` event and an `m.room.member` event with `membership`
      equal to `join` for a member who could issue invites from that server.

      In order to find a corresponding event quickly for verification, the
      content of the join event should include the chosen user's MXID in the
      content with the key `join_authorised_via_users_server`. The actual user

>       chosen is arbitrary.

Reviewer 15: I'd rephrase these two paragraphs, as I think we're mandating that `join_authorised_via_users_server` is set and that user's join event appears in the auth rules?

Actually, do we even need the join event to be added to the auth events? It doesn't really matter if the given user is joined?

Author: > Actually, do we even need the join event to be added to the auth events? It doesn't really matter if the given user is joined?

I'm assuming this is referring to the join event of the authoriser? I think you do want that in the auth chain because you do want them to be joined to the room, otherwise the server in question doesn't actually have the power to issue invites, since their user isn't in the room.

This is the way the implementation works right now at least.

Reviewer 5: yeah this section is a bit unclear. This is a new requirement for `/make_join` - could it be moved out of the bit describing the auth rules?

Author: We talked through this in #matrix-spec:matrix.org -- https://matrix.to/#/!NasysSDfxKxZBzJJoE:matrix.org/$f2CkW6bhBkPylYds9nuygEy9jkBL2wi48z4sIEwC-lQ?via=matrix.org&via=libera.chat&via=vector.modular.im

The summary is that you *do* need to include the event in the event auth and you do need to confirm the user is joined, otherwise it could allow any server to issue joins (even those not in the room) if you have funky power-levels, e.g. if the invite and default levels were the same.

Author: I've tried to clarify this in 88a94049d29179f1a8a1a531ee121389804258af.

* Room upgrades for private rooms (instead of issuing invites to each user).
* Allowing all users in a private room to be able to join a private breakout room.

This does not preclude members from being directly invited to the room, which is
still a useful discovery feature.

## Proposal

In a future room version a new `join_rule` (`restricted`) will be used to reflect
a cross between `invite` and `public` join rules. The content of the join rules
would include the rooms to trust for membership. For example:

```json
{
    "type": "m.room.join_rules",
    "state_key": "",
    "content": {
        "join_rule": "restricted",
        "allow": [
            {
                "type": "m.room_membership",
                "room_id": "!mods:example.org"
            },
            {
                "type": "m.room_membership",
                "room_id": "!users:example.org"
            }
        ]
    }
}
```

This means that a user must be a member of the `!mods:example.org` room or
`!users:example.org` room in order to join without an invite<sup id="a2">[2](#f2)</sup>.
Membership in a single allowed room is enough.

> If the `allow` key is an empty list (or not a list at all), then no users are

Author: This is saying that anything other than a list is invalid.

following keys:

* `type`: `"m.room_membership"` to describe that we are allowing access via room
  membership. Future MSCs may define other types.
* `room_id`: The room ID to check the membership of.

Any entries in the list which do not match the expected format are ignored. Thus,
if all entries are invalid, the list behaves as if empty and all users without
an invite are rejected.

When an homeserver receives a `/join` request from a client or a `/make_join` /
`/send_join` request from another homeserver, the request should only be permitted
if the user is invited to this room, or is joined to one of the listed rooms. If
the user is not a member of at least one of the rooms, the homeserver should return
an error response with HTTP status code of 403 and an `errcode` of `M_FORBIDDEN`.

It is possible for a resident homeserver (one which receives a `/make_join` /
`/send_join` request) to not know if the user is in some of the allowed rooms (due
to not participating in them). If the user is not in any of the allowed rooms that
are known to the homeserver it should return an error response with HTTP status code

> of 400 with an `errcode` of `M_UNABLE_TO_AUTHORISE_JOIN`. The joining server should

Author: Fair. It is implied from the sentence before it, but isn't clear.

is a pre-requisite for generating a correctly-signed join event). In this case
it should return an error response with HTTP status code of 400 and an `errcode`
of `M_UNABLE_TO_GRANT_JOIN`. The joining server should attempt to join via another
resident homeserver.

From the perspective of the [auth rules](https://spec.matrix.org/unstable/rooms/v1/#authorization-rules),
the `restricted` join rule has the same behavior as `public`, with the additional
caveat that servers must ensure that:

* The user's previous membership was `invite` or `join`, or
* The join event has a valid signature from a homeserver whose users have the
  power to issue invites.

  When generating a join event for `/join` or `/make_join`, the server should
  include the MXID of a local user who could issue an invite in the content with
  the key `join_authorised_via_users_server`. The actual user chosen is arbitrary.

  This implies that:

    * A join event issued via `/send_join` is signed by not just the requesting
      server, but also the resident server.<sup id="a3">[3](#f3)</sup>

      In order for the joining server to receive the proper signatures the join

>       event will be returned via `/send_join` in the `event` field.

Reviewer 5: I *still* find it odd that this text about changes to `/make_join` and `/send_join` is buried in the bit about auth rules, but :man_shrugging:

Author: Can you recommend a clearer place to put it?

Author: Would it be better if I de-indented this entire section?

Author: I de-indented this, which hopefully clarifies it a bit. I tried re-writing this a bit, but wasn't really able to fully decouple it from this section.

(as originally suggested in [MSC2962](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2962)),
but there are concerns that changing the behaviour of a pre-existing `public`
join rule may cause security issues in older implementations (that do not yet
understand the new behaviour). This could be solved by introducing a new room
version, thus it seems clearer to introduce a new join rule -- `restricted`.

Using an `allow` key with the `invite` join rules to broaden who can join was rejected
as an option since it requires weakening the [auth rules](https://spec.matrix.org/unstable/rooms/v1/#authorization-rules).
From the perspective of the auth rules, the `restricted` join rule is identical
to `public` with additional checks on the signature of the event.

## Future extensions

### Checking room membership over federation

If a homeserver is not in an allowed room (and thus doesn't know the
membership of it) then the server cannot enforce the membership checks while
generating a join event. Peeking over federation, as described in
[MSC2444](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2444),
could be used to establish if the user is in any of the proper rooms.

> This would then delegate power out to a (potentially) untrusted server, giving that
> the peek server significant power. For example, a poorly chosen peek

Reviewer 17: ```suggestion
This would then delegate power out to a (potentially) untrusted server, giving that
peek server significant power. For example, a poorly chosen peek
```

server could lie about the room membership and add an `@evil_user:example.org`
to an allowed room to gain membership to a room.

As iterated above, this MSC recommends rejecting the join, potentially allowing
the requesting homeserver to retry via another homeserver.

### Kicking users out when they leave the allowed room

In the above example, suppose `@bob:server.example` leaves `!users:example.org`:
should they be removed from the room? Likely not, by analogy with what happens

> when you switch the join rules from public to invite. Join rules currently govern

Reviewer 17: ```suggestion
when you switch the join rules from `public` to `invite`. Join rules currently govern
```

joins, not existing room membership.

It is left to a future MSC to consider this, but some potential thoughts are
given below.

If you assume that a user *should* be removed in this case, one option is to
leave the departure up to Bob's server `server.example`, but this places a
relatively high level of trust in that server. Additionally, if `server.example`
were offline, other users in the room would still see Bob in the room (and their
servers would attempt to send message traffic to it).

Another consideration is that users may have joined via a direct invite, not via
access through a room.

Fixing this is thorny. Some sort of annotation on the membership events might

> help. but it's unclear what the desired semantics are:

Reviewer 17: ```suggestion
help, but it's unclear what the desired semantics are:
```

* Assuming that users in an allowed room are *not* kicked when that room is
  removed from `allow`, are those users then given a pass to remain
  in the room indefinitely? What happens if the room is added back to
  `allow` and *then* the user leaves it?
* Suppose a user joins a room via an allowed room (RoomA). Later, RoomB is added
  to the `allow` list and RoomA is removed. What should happen when the
  user leaves RoomB? Are they exempt from the kick?

It is possible that completely different state should be kept, or a different
`m.room.member` state could be used in a more reasonable way to track this.

### Inheriting join rules

If an allowed room is a space and you make a parent space invite-only, should that
(optionally?) cascade into child rooms? This would have some of the same problems
as inheriting power levels, as discussed in [MSC2962](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2962).

### Additional allow types

Future MSCs may wish to define additional values for the `type` argument, potentially
restricting access via:

* MXIDs or servers.
* A shared secret (room password).

> These are just examples are not fully thought through for this MSC, but it should

Reviewer 17: ```suggestion
These are just examples and are not fully thought through for this MSC, but it should
```

# Restricting room membership based on space membership

A desirable feature is to give room admins the power to restrict membership of

> their room based on the membership of one or more rooms.

Reviewer 18: If we're changing the summary and suggesting spaces are just one use case, should we also update the title to reflect the generality?

Author: I think the title reflects the primary use-case.

* `type`: `"m.room_membership"` to describe that we are allowing access via room
  membership. Future MSCs may define other types.
* `room_id`: The room ID to check the membership of.

Any entries in the list which do not match the expected format are ignored. Thus,
if all entries are invalid, the list behaves as if empty and all users without
an invite are rejected.

The `authorised_servers` key lists servers which are trusted to verify the above
allow rules. It must be a list of string server name, a special value of `"*"`
can be used to allow any server with a member in the room. Any non-string entries
are discarded, if the list is non-existent or empty then no users may join without
an invite.<sup id="a3">[3](#f3)</sup>

From the perspective of the [auth rules](https://spec.matrix.org/unstable/rooms/v1/#authorization-rules),
the `restricted` join rule has the same behavior as `public`, with the additional
caveat that servers must ensure that:

* The user's current membership is `invite` or `join`, or
* The `m.room.member` event has a valid signature from one of the servers listed
  in `authorised_servers`.

> The above check must also be performed against the current room state to potentially

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
The above check must also be performed against the then-current room state to potentially
```

nitpick, not sure though

Author: I'm not sure what you mean by this, how does "current" differ from "then-current"?

Reviewer 9: "current" implies 'now', "then-current" implies "'now' from the perspective of the join event", time-relative wording gets weird when room DAGs get involved, yeah

Author: It is implied that the "above" check is against the "then-current", and must be done again at the "now" state. At least I believe that's what @neilalexander was describing with the soft-failure.

When an homeserver receives a `/join` request from a client or a `/make_join` /
`/send_join` request from another homeserver, the request should only be permitted
if the user is invited to this room, or is joined to one of the listed rooms. If
the user is not a member of at least one of the rooms, the homeserver should return
an error response with HTTP status code of 403 and an `errcode` of `M_FORBIDDEN`.

It is possible for a resident homeserver (one which receives a `/make_join` /

> `/send_join` request to not know if the user is in some of the allowed rooms (due

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
`/send_join` request) to not know if the user is in some of the allowed rooms (due
```

to not participating in them). If the user is not in any of the allowed rooms that
are known to the homeserver it should return an error response with HTTP status code
of 400 with an `errcode` of `M_UNABLE_TO_AUTHORISE_JOIN`. The joining server should
attempt to join via another resident homeserver. If the resident homeserver knows
that the user is not in *any* of the allowed rooms it should return an error response
with HTTP status code of 403 and an `errcode` of `M_FORBIDDEN`. Note that it is a
configuration error if there are allowed rooms with no participating authorised
servers.

> A chosen resident homeserver might also be unable to issue invites, in this case

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
A chosen resident homeserver might also be unable to issue invites; in this case
```

> A chosen resident homeserver might also be unable to issue invites, in this case

Reviewer 5: I'm not really following where the idea of issuing invites came from?

Reviewer 5: oh I get it now.

```suggestion
A chosen resident homeserver might also be unable to issue invites (which, as below, is a pre-requisite
for generating a correctly-signed join event). In this case,
```

Author: Would it be clearer to move these two paragraphs below the bit about auth rules?

Reviewer 5: errrm there's something to be said for keeping all the words about make_join and send_join together, rather than interrupting them to talk about auth_rules.

Author: I moved this down further, it seems more appropriate to defer this to later in the text since it is discussing error handling and we haven't even fully described the happy path yet!

it should return an error response with HTTP status code of 400 and an `errcode`
of `M_CANNOT_ALLOW`. The joining server should attempt to join via another
resident homeserver.

From the perspective of the [auth rules](https://spec.matrix.org/unstable/rooms/v1/#authorization-rules),
the `restricted` join rule has the same behavior as `public`, with the additional
caveat that servers must ensure that:

* The user's previous membership was `invite` or `join`, or

> * The `m.room.member` event with a `membership` of `join` has a valid signature

Reviewer 5: I found this hard to understand. I suggest that you rephrase this to:

> ... with the additional caveat servers must ensure that, for `m.room.member` events with a `membership` of `join`:

... and then just:

```suggestion
* The join event has a valid signature
```

Reviewer 5: you only did half of this.

Author: Sorry, GitHub is making it really difficult to follow comments at this point.

  that:

    * A join event issued via `/send_join` is signed by not just the requesting
      server, but also the resident server.<sup id="a3">[3](#f3)</sup>

      In order for the joining server to receive the proper signatures the join
      event will be returned via `/send_join` in the `event` field.
    * The auth chain of the join event needs to include an event which proves
      the homeserver can be issuing the join. This can be done by including the
      `m.room.power_levels` event and an `m.room.member` event with `membership`
      equal to `join` for a member who could issue invites from that server.

      In order to find a corresponding event quickly for verification, the
      content of the join event should include the chosen user's MXID in the
      content with the key `join_authorised_via_users_server`. The actual user
      chosen is arbitrary.

      This creates a new restriction on the relationship between the resident
      servers used for `/make_join` and `/send_join` -- they must now both go to
      the same server (since the `join_authorised_via_users_server` is added in
      the call to `/make_join`, while the final signature is added during

>       the call to `/send_join`).

Reviewer 5: this begs the question of what happens if a server receives a `/send_join` for an event that was `/make_join`ed elsewhere. Does it accept it blindly, or check?

Author: I've included that this is a 400 error. I don't think there's anything "better" to do there?

When an homeserver receives a `/join` request from a client or a `/make_join` /
`/send_join` request from another homeserver, the request should only be permitted
if the user is invited to this room, or is joined to one of the listed rooms. If
the user is not a member of at least one of the rooms, the homeserver should return
an error response with HTTP status code of 403 and an `errcode` of `M_FORBIDDEN`.

From the perspective of the [auth rules](https://spec.matrix.org/unstable/rooms/v1/#authorization-rules),
the `restricted` join rule has the same behavior as `public`, with the additional
caveat that servers must ensure that:

* The user's previous membership was `invite` or `join`, or
* The join event has a valid signature from a homeserver whose users have the
  power to issue invites.

>   When generating a join event the server should include the MXID of a local user
>   who could issue an invite in the content with the key
>   `join_authorised_via_users_server`. The actual user chosen is arbitrary.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  When generating a join event for `/join` or `/make_join`, the server should include the MXID of a local user
  who could issue an invite in the content with the key
  `join_authorised_via_users_server`. The actual user chosen is arbitrary.
```

It is possible for a resident homeserver (one which receives a `/make_join` /
`/send_join` request) to not know if the user is in some of the allowed rooms (due
to not participating in them). If the user is not in any of the allowed rooms that

> are known to the homeserver, and the homeserver is not participating in all listed

Reviewer 19: “…not participating in all allowed rooms” sounds ambiguous.
```suggestion
are known to the homeserver, and the homeserver is not participating in any of the listed
```

* `knock`: the same as `invite`, except anyone can knock, subject to `ban` and
  `server_acls`. See [MSC2403](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2403).
* `private`: This is reserved, but unspecified.
* `restricted`: the same as `public`, with the additional caveat that servers must
  verify the `m.room.member` event is signed by one of the `authorised_servers` if

>   a member is not yet invited or joined to the room.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
  a member was not yet invited or joined into the room.
```

    * The auth chain of the join event needs to include events which prove
      the homeserver can be issuing the join. This can be done by including:

      * The `m.room.power_levels` event.
      * The join event of the user specified in `join_authorised_via_users_server`.

      It should be confirmed that the authorising user is in the room. (This
      prevents situations where any homeserver could process the join, even if
      they weren't in the room, under certain power level conditions.)

The above creates a new restriction on the relationship between the resident
servers used for `/make_join` and `/send_join` -- they must now both go to
the same server (since the `join_authorised_via_users_server` is added in
the call to `/make_join`, while the final signature is added during
the call to `/send_join`). If a request to `/send_join` is received that includes
an event from a different resident server it should return an error response with

> HTTP status code of 400.

Author: > (or are we actually saying that it should check the `join_authorised_via_users_server` is itself?)

This.

> HTTP status code of 400.

Author: Although thinking on this a bit more, I don't think the `/make_join` and `/send_join` need to necessarily go to the same server, more of that the `/send_join` needs to go to the server which `join_authorised_via_users_server` points to.

I'm unsure if there's any security issues with a resident server having `/make_join` called on it and returning a `join_authorised_via_users_server` from a *different* server. It doesn't really seem like there would be a problem with this?
